Installation Instructions For iDarwinCore

Server Configurations

iDarwinCore requires a few things in order to be operational. This includes a properly configured MySQL server, Apache server, and PHP.

This database package has been extensively tested with Apache 2.4, MySQL 5.7, and PHP 7.

I highly recommend WAMP64 for windows as it is easy to update and saves quite a bit of hassle in setting up these servers independently.

In order to use all of iDarwinCore's features you will want to make a few modifications to your servers.

PHP

I suggest changing the following settings in your php.ini:

max_execution_time = 3600;
file_uploads = On
upload_tmp_dir ="d:/wamp64/tmp"; (or whatever your server's tmp folder is.)
upload_max_filesize = 100M;
default_socket_timeout = 300;
max_input_time = 120;
memory_limit = 300M;

The above settings allow your scripts to execute for up to an hour, and permits you to upload files up to 100 mb, along with 
permitting sockets to wait up to 300 seconds before giving up, allows the script to parse input for up to 2 minutes, and for PHP 
to utilize up to 300 MB of physical memory.

MySQL

I suggest changing the following settings in your my.ini (or my.cnf):

secure_file_priv="d:/wamp64/tmp"
sql-mode=""

Secure_file_priv setting defines a directory from which you can import files into the MySQL database. You will want to set this 
as your system (or servers) tmp folder location. This must be the absolute path location and not a relative path. The sql-mode 
setting turns off several strict modes that are by default set as on. It is important to turn off strict mode as you most likely 
will be importing data into MySQL which has dates set as such: 0000-00-00 for various fields.

Downloading iDarwinCore

iDarwinCore is available for download from GitHub. You can download it as a zip file from this location, or if you have git 
installed you can install it directly using git.

Installing iDarwinCore

You will want to unzip the zip file you downloaded from github.com into your webserver's root folder.

Rename the folder from idarwincore-master to idarwincore.

In a text editor open connect.sample.php and edit dbhost, dbuser, dbpass for your MySQL server, and save the file as connect.php.

In a text editor open common.sample.php and edit the file to customize for your needs, and save the file as common.php

In a text editor open setup_database.sample.php, being sure to change dbhost, dbuser, and dbpass to your particular MySQL 
server settings, and save the file as setup_database.php

You are now ready to create the database and it's tables. Open a web browser and in the address bar put the location of your webserver (eg. http://localhost/idarwincore/setup_database.php) and press enter. It may take a few minutes to install all the tables.

Congratulations! You have installed iDarwinCore!

If you encountered an error, you can review your servers log files to diagnose the situation. You should also test your 
php's installation with phpinfo command (google phpinfo for more info).

How To Use iDarwinCore

Prepping Data for iDarwinCore

iDarwinCore requires Symbiota DwC-A Zip File, and in addition can optionally import a Remote Images File List, and Local 
Images File list

(1) Symbiota DwC-A Zip File
(2) Remote Images File List
(3) Local Images File List
(4) Barcode List
(5) Blocked List

You will first need to make a folder called dwca inside your system or server's tmp folder (for mac users it is usually /Library/WebServer/Documents/tmp, for WAMP users it is usually C:/wamp64/tmp). You only have to do this once.

The only mandatory file for use of iDarwinCore is the Symbiota DwC-A Zip File. The other files provide a more robust use of 
iDarwinCore functions.

The Symbiota DwC-A Zip File can be downloaded from the Symbiota portal which hosts your data. Look under Administrative 
Control Panel for a link labeled "Download Backup".

The Remote Images File List is a text file that contains a list of all images hosted on a remote server (such as iPlant/CyVerse). 
If you are using iPlant/CyVerse, then this list can be obtained by using iCommands. iCommands is available for many different 
platforms including Linux, Unix, Mac OS X, and Windows. You will need to know the path to your files on whatever remote system you 
are using. Simply install iCommands, configure as instructed from the iCommands website, and then open a terminal (command prompt) 
and issue the command ils -Lr (path_to_your_folde_and_files_on_the_remote_system) > iplant_t.txt. This constructs a file 
called iplant_t.txt which contains the full image path and filename along with other important iPlant info.

The Local Images File List is a txt file containing a list of all local specimen images. This can be obtained by opening a 
command prompt and changing directory to the root imaging folder and typing dir /s /b > nDrive.txt. For Mac OS users, you will 
generate your nDrive.txt with the following command find (path_to_your_folders_or_files) -type f > nDrive.txt. This will construct 
a file called nDrive.txt which contains the full path and file location for your specimens images.

The Barcode List is a list of all barcodes purchased for your collection. This list can usually be produced with ease in excel and 
saved as a text file.

The Blocked List is a list of taxa in which you desire the locality and image to be hidden from the general public. This should be a 
csv with four fields: Family, ScientificName, ScientificNameAuthorship, TaxonID. This list can be exported from a Symbiota checklist.

Importing Symbiota Portal Data

In order to use iDarwinCore, you need to load it with your data

The first files you want to install (if available) are the iplant_t.txt, nDrive.txt, barcodes.txt, and blockedlist.txt. These files 
can be imported by clicking on the Setup menu and choosing the appropriate menu item to upload the particular file(s) you may have.

iDarwinCore can import your Symbiota DwC-A backup files along with the files you placed in the "dwca" folder. To download the 
DwC-A backup file log into the symbiota portal that is hosting the data you are interested in importing, and download a backup of 
your data. Next open idarwincore up in your web browser (eg. http://localhost/idarwincore/) and click on Setup menu at the top, and 
then on Import DwC-A File.

Click on "Choose file" button and browse to the symbiota backup file you downloaded and click on it and then click on the 
"Upload" button.

The script can take a few minutes to import all your data along with generating new data tables. The script provides some feedback 
as to what it is processing on your screen.

Once finished you should have 11 tables within your idarwincore database.

Using iDarwinCore

iDarwinCore creates and utilizes a few MySQL data tables

(1) Occurrences - A list of all specimen occurrence records
(2) Identifications - A list of all annotations to occurrence records
(3) Images - A list of all image links
(4) Blocked - A list of specimens of special concern to which locality data will be hidden in queries
(5) Barcodes- A list of all your barcodes (optional)
(6) NoSkeletalRecords - A list of occurrence records in which there exists only a catalogNumber and image file
(7) iPlant - A list of all images, image paths, and barcodes found on iPlant
(8) Duplicates - A list of duplicate occurrence records
(9) nDrive - A list of all images, image paths, and barcodes found in your local image storage
(10) ImageSys - A list of all occurrence records with images, which includes the occurrence record information 
along with image file paths, and filenames
(11) Occurrences_Full - A list similar to ImageSys but also includes all the local image file paths and filenames

iDarwinCore Menu Options

SEARCH

Search Collection - Allows you to query the Occurrence Records for fields such as Family, State/Province, County, Genus, Species,
Accession #, Collector, Collection #, and Barcode. Output will be displayed in paginated table, with the id field being a hotlink 
to occurrence editor of the Symbiota portal. Note this feature hides images, and locality data for taxa present in the blockedlist
table.

Admin Search - Allows you to query the Occurrence Records for fields such as Family, State/Province, County, Genus, Species, 
Accession #, Collector, Collection #, and Barcode. Output will be displayed in paginated table, with the id field being a hotlink 
to occurrence editor of the Symbiota portal. Note this feature does not hide images or locality data for taxa present in the 
blockedlist table

Search By Family - Allows you to browse the Occurrence Records. This feature starts by displaying all the plant families within 
the occurrence records. You can then click on a family, which then displays a list of all genera, you can then click on a genus, 
in which it will display all species belonging to that genus held in the occurrence records.

Show County Records - Allows you to enter the genus, species, and state. A list of counties within your chosen state in which the 
taxa you chose are present in the occurrence records.

SHOW TABLES

Show Tables - Allows you to peruse the contents of any of the 11 tables listed above

DIAGNOSTICS

Jump To SernecPortal Record - This allows you to enter an OCCID (occurrence record id) for SernecPortal and to be taken to 
the occurrence editor for that particular occurrence record id.

Search iPlant By Barcode - This allows you to enter a barcode and retrieve the iPlant Data Service Links information (which 
contains iPlant file location, guid, etc.)

Show Duplicate Records - Displays a list of all duplicate occurrence records (see above in regards to Duplicate Table)

Database Statistics - This generates several lists, such as: unique record statistics for several tables, displays a list of 
duplicates based on occurrence id (in occurrences table), displays duplicates based on catalogNumber (aka barcode in occurrences 
table), displays a list of duplicates based on otherCatalogNumbers (aka Accession# in occurrences table), displays duplicates 
based on coreid (Image Table), display a list of barcoded specimens (in occurrences table) without corresponding image file, 
displays a list of barcodes of invalid length (in occurrences table), displays a list of invalid barcodes (in occurrence table), 
and displays a list of barcodes (in occurrence records) for which no label data exists. Clicking on any item in any of these 
lists takes one to the occurrence editor on SernecPortal.

Log Image Records XML to File - This takes a list of barcodes and requests information via iPlant's Data Service for each 
barcode and stores the iPlant data service data (xml data) to a file in /idarwincore/xmls/ folder.

DOCUMENTATION

Installation Instructions - Shows how to install iDarwinCore and configure MySQL/Apache/PHP for best results.
